# dsdoe
Paper and code for 18.086 project Direct Solution of the Discrete Ordinates Equations


# Abstract

The purpose of this paper is to investigate and implement the discrete ordinates method for one- and two-dimensional multigroup neutron transport, and to solve directly the resulting equations. Historically, the discrete ordinates equations have been solved via the power iteration method (PI). The approach as typically implemented is very memory efficient, but for highly diffusive problems, the PI method is notoriously ineffective. Several techniques to accelerate the PI method have been developed, but they are complicated even for simple geometries. Here, an alternative approach is investigated, which is to solve the discrete ordinates system directly. The general forms of the multigroup discrete ordinates matrices in both one and two dimensions have been derived and implemented in MATLAB using its built-in sparse matrix utilities. To solve the systems, both the standard “backslash” for direct elimination and combinations of built-in Krylov solvers (GMRES and BiCG-STAB) with ILU preconditioning are studied. The computational expense for these direct approaches is compared to that of the standard PI approach, which has also been implemented in Matlab and verified against a production discrete ordinates code. One-dimensional studies suggest that the direct approach (with either elimination or Krylov solvers) is faster than the PI method by roughly a factor of two for low angular orders (and hence small bandwidths). For highly diffusive problems, the direct method is up to an order of magnitude faster. In general, the efficiency of the direct method was observed to degrade for larger matrix bandwidths, which occurs for higher angular resolution and more energy groups. Moreover, direct elimination in all cases was more efficient than the Krylov techniques investigated. Finally, the cost of the direct method was due largely to the expense of building the underlying sparse matrix via the built-in commands; whether a more efficient way to do this in MATLAB remains a topic for continued work.

# Comments

This project is old (spring 2010) and was my first attempt to understand the linear-algebraic aspects of solving neutron transport equations.  I've learned much since completing the project, some of which led to Detran (a fairly complete discrete-ordinates package also to be found on GitHub).  Although a practical implementation of the discrete-ordinates method based on explicit matrices seems unlikely, I hope the code is of use for those learning about neutron transport methods.
